--- Page 1 ---
i 
 
Kiambatisho 301.3.1A 
UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES ON ETHICAL USE OF 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 2026

--- Page 2 ---
ii 
 
UNIVERSITY OF DAR ES SALAAM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES ON ETHICAL USE OF 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dar es Salaam, 2026

--- Page 3 ---
iii 
 
 
University of Dar es Salaam 
Office of the Deputy Vice Chancellor, Research 
P. O. Box 35091 
DAR ES SALAAM 
 
Tel./Fax: +255-22-2410743 
Email: dvc.research@udsm.ac.tz 
Website: www.udsm.ac.tz 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright ©2026 by University of Dar es Salaam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All rights reserved. No part of these guidelines may be reproduced in any form , either by 
photostat, microform, retrieval system, or any other means , without prior written permission 
of the publisher.

--- Page 4 ---
iv 
 
 
 
 
Name of Guidelines Guidelines on the Use of Artificial Intelligence, 2026. 
Description of Guidelines The guidelines provide standards for the use of 
Artificial Intelligence at the University of Dar es 
Salaam. 
Guidelines applies to University-wide 
 Staff only Students only 
 Staff and Students 
Status New guidelines Revision of existing guidelines 
Description of Revision Not applicable 
 
 
Approval Authority University Council 
Governing Authority Senate Research and Knowledge Exchange 
Committee 
Responsible Officer Deputy Vice Chancellor, Research 
 
 
Approval Date 
Effective Date 
Date of Last Revision 
Date of Review

--- Page 5 ---
v 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................... 1 
2. DEFINITION OF KEY TERMS .............................................................................. 2 
3. PURPOSE OF GUIDELINES .................................................................................. 3 
4. SCOPE OF THE GUIDELINES .............................................................................. 4 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE USE IN RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND 
CONSULTANCY ............................................................................................................ 4 
5. Research .............................................................................................................................. 4 
6. Innovation ........................................................................................................................... 5 
7. Consultancy and Public Services ........................................................................................ 6 
8. Authorship .......................................................................................................................... 6 
9. Peer review ......................................................................................................................... 7 
10. Editorial and publication processes ................................................................................ 7 
11. Research Funding and Compliance ................................................................................ 8 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE USE IN EDUCATION AND PEDAGOGY................. 8 
12. Academic Integrity and Accessibility ............................................................................. 9 
13. Specific Uses of AI in Disciplines .................................................................................. 9 
14. Course Content Creation ............................................................................................... 10 
15. Course Assessment and Examination ........................................................................... 10 
16. Dissertations/Theses and Academic Papers .................................................................. 11 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE USE IN ADMINISTRATION ................................... 11 
17. AI Management ............................................................................................................ 11 
18. Risks of AI-Enhanced Cyber and Related Attacks ....................................................... 12 
19. Compliance Oversight and Accountability ................................................................... 12 
20. Service, Information Quality and Accuracy ................................................................. 12 
21. Legal Issues in AI Use .................................................................................................. 12 
22. Staff Training and Professional Development .............................................................. 12 
23. Amendment and Revision of the Guidelines ................................................................ 12 
24. Financial Implications ................................................................................................... 13 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ......................................................................................................... 14 
APPENDIX: DECLARATION FOR USE OF AI IN SCIENTIFIC WRITING ........... 15

--- Page 6 ---
vi 
 
LIST OF ACRONYMS 
 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
DICT Directorate of Information and Communication Technology 
DVC Deputy Vice Chancellor 
GAI Generative Artificial Intelligence 
IP Intellectual Property 
IT Information Technology 
LLM Large Language Model 
MoEST Ministry of Education, Science and Technology 
PI Principal Investigator 
PFA Planning, Finance and Administration 
UDSM University of Dar es Salaam

--- Page 7 ---
1. INTRODUCTION 
The University of Dar es Salaam (UDSM) embraces and advocates for the core values of ethical 
conduct and integrity in research, innovation, administration, teaching and learning , and 
consultancy. Adherence to these core values by the UDSM community (staff and students) 
promotes transparency and accountability, which are potential qualities for the University to 
achieve excellence locally, regionally, and internationally. UDSM manifests this achievement 
through her grand vision UDSM 2061 of becoming a reputable world-class university that is 
responsive to national, regional and global development needs through engagement in 
dynamic knowledge creation and application . Achieving this ambitious goal requires 
establishment and reinforc ement of robust and effective policies and guidelines, including 
those that respond to the impact of emerging technologies, such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
on ethics and best practices of the University’s primary functions and processes. 
 
Recently, we have wi tnessed an increased use of Generative AI (GAI) and AI -assisted 
technologies in research , innovation, academics, and administration . GAI, a disruptive 
technology that mimics human intelligence in content generation , has completely 
revolutionized our traditional approaches of doing research, teaching, and administrative tasks. 
Researchers, including postgraduate students and their supervisors, apply GAI to refine 
research ideas, devise strategies for efficient literature review, and polish language , among 
other applications. Journal editors apply GAI to automatically assess and identify suitable 
manuscripts, based on the pre -defined standards and criteria, which can be sent out for peer 
review. Consultants and administrators leverage GAI capabilities to generate plausible reports 
for funders . In the midst of these promising applications, there has been several observed 
ethical and practical concerns on the use of GAI. Addressing these concerns is imperative to 
ensure quality, integrity, and transpare ncy across all key functions and processes of an 
institution. Recognizing the adverse impacts of these concerns, UNESCO established 
Guidance for GAI in Education and Research1. Additionally, in January 2025, the Ministry of 
Education, Science and Technology ( MoEST) established the National Guidelines for 
Artificial Intelligence in Education . These guidelines ensure effective, ethical, secure and 
responsible use of AI tools within the Tanzania’s education sector. 
 
These national developments have p rompted UDSM to institute specific guidelines for the 
UDSM community to responsibly use AI while ensuring effective knowledge creation and 
dissemination. The guidelines extend the scope of UDSM units, including the Offices of DVC–
Research, DVC–Academic, and DVC–PFA, to address concerns emanating from exponentially 
growing use of AI by researchers , innovators, academicians, administrators, consultants, and 
students. 
 
The UDSM Artificial Intelligence Guidelines (2025) aim to establish general principles that 
ensure proper use of AI in research , innovation, administration, teaching and learning , and 
consultancy. The guidelines are anchored on the National Guidelines for Artificial Intelligence 
in Education (2025), National Digital Education Strategy (2024/25 – 2029/30), National 
Digital Education Guideline s (2025), Tanzania Digital Economy Framework (2024-2034), 
UDSM ICT Policy (2022), and UDSM Research Ethics Policy and Operational Procedures 
(2010). They are also benchmarked from reputable research and academic institutions, 
publishers, journals, and index ing databases. The general objective remains to recognize the 
 
1 https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/guidance-generative-ai-education-and-research

--- Page 8 ---
impact of AI in academia, ensuring that this promising technology is ethically used to create, 
refine, and advance knowledge. 
 
The UDSM AI Guidelines adhere to guiding principles of data protection because Generative 
AI necessitate uploading of data and information into AI tools to generate or modify content. 
These principles include National Data Protection Act (2023) and UDSM Security Policy and 
Operational Procedures (2020). 
 
2. RATIONALE 
The establishment of UDSM guidelines on the ethical use of GAI in her Units (schools, 
colleges, and institutes) builds from the rapid integration of this emerging technology into 
teaching and learning, research and innovation, administration, and consultancy. Considering 
the potential impact of GAI, establishing the guiding principles on its use becomes paramount. 
If used without transparency, GAI tools can undermine the principles of honesty, originality, 
critical thinking, fairness, and intellectual autonomy that UDSM upholds (National Guidelines 
for Artificial Intelligence in Education, 2024; National Digital Education Strategy, 2024/25 – 
2029/30). 
In academic settings, GAI pose unique risks that demand careful management. Institutions 
must address these risks proactively through ethical guidelines to identify, evaluate, and 
minimize potential harms. GAI may, for instance, introduce bias and discrimination, where 
algorithms can reinforce inequities in areas such as admission processes, grading, student 
support services, or research applications (Cornell University, 2023). 
These guidelines are also informed by critical concerns in privacy and data protection. Feeding 
sensitive student information, research data, or personal details into publicly accessible AI tools 
can lead to security breaches or unintended reuse by third p arties. Over -reliance on AI by 
students or faculty risks undermining core competencies, such as writing proficiency, analytical 
thinking, and problem-solving abilities. Finally, the opaque nature of many AI systems hides 
the reasoning behind decisions in a ssessments or recommendations, which undermines trust 
and accountability (Cornell University, 2023; Flanagin et al., 2024). 
UDSM plays a vital role in building trust with key stakeholders , including employers and 
development partners, by providing clear insights into the application of GAI in credentialing 
and knowledge generation. Transparent and consistent guidelines help alleviate confusion, 
anxiety, and perceptions of unfairness, fostering confidence in ethical practices. Surveys reveal 
that stakeholders increasingly prioritize institutions with clear GAI guidelines . Furthermore, 
UDSM bears a societal duty to cultivate AI -literate graduates who grasp not only practical 
applications but also the technology's ethical dimensions, limitations, and broader societal 
effects. With expertise spanning wider academic fields (e.g., philosophy, law, computer 
science, engineering, and education), UDSM is ideally positioned to lead by example, 
promoting ethical reasoning and sparking critical discussions on GAI. 
 
3. DEFINITION OF KEY TERMS 
For the purpose of these guidelines, the following definitions of the key terms shall be adopted:

--- Page 9 ---
3.1 Academic or technical or administrative Staff shall refer to all personnel employed by 
the University primarily for teaching, research, and consultancy; 
3.2 Artificial Intelligence shall refer to simulation of human intelligence in machines, 
encompassing learning, reasoning, problem solving, perception, and decision making; 
3.3 AI Tools shall refer to software applications or platforms that utilize AI techniques to 
perform specific tasks or solve particular problems. 
3.4 Author shall refer to any person who individually or jointly with others makes a design, 
a mark or copyrightable work and who meets the criteria for authorship under the 
Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Act of Tanzania. 
3.5 Editor (such as journal editors, book editors, managing editors, or associate editors) 
shall refer to persons who are professionals responsible for overseeing the peer-review 
process by selecting appropriate reviewers, providing guidance to authors and 
reviewers, making decisions (e.g., accept, revise, or reject ) on submissions , and 
publishing written content. They ensure quality and accuracy of the published content, 
adhering to publication standards. 
3.6 Ethical/Responsible Use of AI shall refer to the use of AI tools in a manner that is 
trustworthy-that is, lawful (compliant with applicable laws and regulations), ethical 
(aligned with ethical principles and values), and robust (technically sound and mindful 
of its social context)2. 
3.7 Generative Artificial Intelligence shall refer to the type of AI that can produce different 
types of content, including text, images, audio, video, and synthetic data. 
3.8 Innovation shall refer to conversion of ideas or inventions into products with economic 
value to meet market demands. 
3.9 Large Language Model shall refer to a model that uses AI, specifically deep learning 
algorithms, for natural language processing tasks, including la nguage generation, 
summarization of information, answering questions, and writing different types of 
creative contents. 
3.10 Privacy shall refer to the aspect of controlling how personally identifiable information 
and data are collected, stored, and used in computing devices, such as computer, and 
the Internet. 
3.11 Publisher shall refer to the approved entity of the University responsible for the entire 
publication process, including editorial management, peer review coordination, 
formatting, printing, online hostin g, marketing, and distribution of research papers, 
journals, books, and other scholarly works in hardcopies (written), digital, or 
multimedia content. 
3.12 Reviewer shall refer to a specialist in a relevant field who assesses submitted research 
manuscripts to determine their quality and appropriateness for publication in journals. 
3.13 Consultancy and public services shall refer all internal and external consultancy, service 
jobs, and contracted works , such as laboratory testing against certain national and 
international standards/compliance, as defined by the UDSM Consultancy Policy and 
Operational Procedures. 
3.14 University shall refer to the University of Dar es Salaam. 
4. PURPOSE OF GUIDELINES 
4.1 To establish a framework under which the University encourages and reinforces ethical 
and practical use of AI in academic publishing, academic and administrative tasks, 
research and innovation, and consultancy, and seeks to balance the exciting new 
possibilities offered by these tools with the awareness of their limitations; 
 
2 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai

--- Page 10 ---
4.2 To provide guidance to Colleges, Schools, Departments, and employees of the 
University on matters of AI usage and the need for rigorous attention to accu racy, 
intellectual property, security, data protection and privacy of personally identifiable 
information, and ethical issues; 
4.3 To ensure that a consistent approach is adopted by staff and students , and that all 
principles for the accountability of AI usage are taken into account and in compliance 
with relevant rules and regulations of the University. 
5. SCOPE OF THE GUIDELINES 
These guidelines shall apply to Generative AI and related technologies that can generate or 
modify content (e.g., text, audio, image, or video) and to the following groups: 
5.1 All academic, administrative and technical staff employed by the University of Dar es 
Salaam, who, at any time of their employment, are required to engage in research, 
innovation, administration, teaching and learning , and consultancy within the 
University; 
5.2 All UDSM academic staff on tenure track (permanent and pensionable) employment 
who hold leadership positions within the University and who have administrative and 
technical staff reporting. The guidelines shall also be applied to visiting scholars, 
researchers, and staff on contract (e.g., part-time staff), and occasional students who 
shall be engaged in research, innovation, administration, teaching and learning , and/or 
consultancy; 
5.3 All academic and administrative units with their constituencies that house academic 
publishing outlets, such as journals; 
5.4 All undergraduate and postgraduate students who are required to engage in research, 
innovation, and academics as part of the fulfilment of the award of their degrees. 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE USE IN RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND 
CONSULTANCY 
These guidelines instill trust and transparency among key participants that engage research , 
innovation, and consultancy outputs. They ensure that AI is deployed responsibly in academic 
writing, publishing, research funding, innovation, and consultancy or public services in a way 
that is fair, safe, and accountable. Concerned with potential threats and risks of AI, reputabl e 
publishers and leading research institutions have established policies and guidelines on the 
responsible use of AI. The goal remains to create and disseminate intelligible knowledge that 
aligns with globally established ethical principles. On this account, any use of AI in research 
(e.g., idea generation and exploration, coding assistance, interactive online search, and 
literature classification/drafting), innovation, and consultancy shall be declared (Appendix). 
The proportion of AI generated content, especially when the AI tool is used in writing, shall 
not exceed 30%. 
6. Research 
6.1 Researchers are encouraged to make themselves aware of the limitations of AI, and 
ensure that they are responsible for the integrity of the research and the output produced. 
It is the researcher’s responsibility to counteract and avoid limitations of AI and AI -
assisted tools, including generation of biased and inaccurate content. Researchers 
cannot offload responsibility for bias in their work on the AI system. 
6.2 Researchers shall use AI or AI -assisted tools in the following ways to support data 
collection and generation:

--- Page 11 ---
i. Collecting and organizing data; 
ii. Generating data out of unstructured information; 
iii. Summarizing data coming from various sources; and, 
iv. Scaling up data collection with AI by conducting faster and less resource 
intensive experiments. 
6.3 Researchers may use AI responsibly to triage, organize, summarize, and quickly get 
directionally oriented, in the context of an exponentially growing base of reported 
claims and established knowledge as they prepare research proposals; 
6.4 Researchers shall not use AI or AI -assisted tools for generating and recording data, 
except for building the infrastructure for which data can be reproduced; 
6.5 Researchers, including principal investigators (PIs) and supervisors of postgraduate
 students, shall provide leadership, guidance, and mentorship to early-career researchers 
of the University on the ethical use of AI; they shall communicate the standards and the 
norms in their specific fields, ensuring integrity and quality of the research; 
6.6 Researchers are encouraged to first generate research hypotheses (or research 
questions) using their personal creative processes before seeking AI for ideation of the 
hypothesis, thereby preventing leakages into the public space and therefore damaging 
the reputation of both researcher and institution. 
7. Innovation 
7.1 Any use of AI in conceiving an invention, reducing it to practice, or generating 
copyrighted materials must be carefully documented and disclosed to all relevant 
parties involved in the publicatio n. Within these disclosure and documentation 
requirements, AI may be used in a limited, transparent manner to support innovation 
activities, such as brainstorming, generating alternative approaches, and structuring or 
outlining complex ideas and content, p rovided that the human contributors remain 
responsible for the originality, accuracy, and final form of the work; 
7.2 The University has limited ability to oversee how privately owned AI tools collect, 
retain, or reuse user -provided information—often for the provider’s commercial 
purposes and without compensating the original authors. Therefore, when research is 
likely to result in commercialization or revenue -generating publications, researchers 
should preferentially use AI tools who se training data and licensing terms are clearly 
compatible with public-domain or properly licensed content (and whose terms do not 
claim rights over user inputs or outputs). In all cases, before uploading any text, data, 
images, code, or other materials i nto an AI system, researchers and innovators must 
confirm that they have the legal and contractual rights to share that material (including 
third-party data, copyrighted content, and confidential or sponsored research materials), 
whether or not they expect financial benefit from the AI-assisted output; 
7.3 Staff are encouraged to embed AI usage within a larger innovation strategy, i.e., 
UDSM Guidelines for Commercialization of Intellectual Property, Innovations and 
Research Products, that has demonstratable results; 
7.4 UDSM shall promote the responsible use of AI tools by academics, research centers, 
research centers of excellence, and institutes/schools/colleges to improve the 
competitiveness of University innovations. UDSM shall use AI for trend scanning and 
evidence synthesis to identify emerging scientific and market developments, prioritize 
promising directions, and support early decisions on funding, partnerships, prototyping, 
and commercialization.

--- Page 12 ---
8. Consultancy and Public Services 
8.1 UDSM Staff members shall ensure ethical use of AI in all activities related to 
consultancy or public services , which include marketing and branding of UDSM , to 
carry out consultancy, monitoring and evaluation of consultancy activities, capacity 
building to the members of UDSM and the public in general by declaring any content 
generated from AI, such as consultancy reports; 
8.2 To ensure accountability in consulta ncy and public service work, UDSM staff shall 
appoint a designated owner for each AI system, define the owner’s responsibilities, and 
document the system’s intended use, limitations, and decision authority. The owner 
shall provide ongoing oversight by verifying outputs against agreed quality and ethical 
standards, keeping records of AI use and key decisions, monitoring for errors or bias, 
and promptly correcting, escalating, or discontinuing use when issues arise; 
8.3 UDSM members engaging in consultancy activities shall ensure privacy and data 
security related to their clients at all the time while ensuring compliance to regulations, 
and address risks of data breaches, including AI generated data. 
9. Authorship 
9.1 Authors shall not use AI or AI -assisted tools to create or alter multimedia (e.g., 
enhancing, moving, removing, or introducing specific features), including images and 
videos, in submitted manuscripts, except when such tools are used as part of the 
research design or research method to generate or interpret the underlying research data; 
9.2 Authors that use generative AI or AI -assisted tools in the writing process shall ensure 
that such tools are used only to improve readability and language of the content; authors 
shall be responsible and accountable for the originality, validity, accuracy, and integrity 
of their works, noting that AI can produce erroneous results and citations; 
9.3 Authors may, subject to authorship, citation, and fact-checking considerations, use AI 
to ideate and iterate on the quality of a literature review. Examples include the 
following: 
i. refining the review to include both prior research and its connection to the new 
research idea; 
ii. rewriting the style of the literature review; and, 
iii. refining the literature review to emphasize the contribution of the new research, 
along with its relevance to other gaps in literature, uncertainties, or even market 
sentiments. 
However, authors should fact-check the literature and be aware of incomplete, biased, 
 or even false AI outputs; 
9.4 Researchers may use AI or AI -assisted tools for improving workflows and research 
processes, including constructing or critiquing survey questions or interview templates; 
Authors are encouraged to use well -documented AI resources for collecting and 
processing data; 
9.5 Authors shall not list or cite AI and AI-assisted technologies as an author or co-author; 
 in this context, authorship means a natural human entitled to carry out responsibilities
 and tasks related to the research, such as providing contractual assurance on the 
integrity of the research, consenting to UDSM Journal Policy and Guidelines 
through publishing agreements, taking accountability on the content, and drawing 
conclusions;

--- Page 13 ---
9.6 Authors must fulfil all core scholarly responsibilities and shall not submit manuscripts 
in which AI tools replace essential author s’ work (e.g., study design, 
analysis/interpretation, conclusions, or ensuring accuracy and integrity); 
9.7 Authors shall ensure adherence to AI software’s specific usage policies, including 
proper attribution to content; 
9.8 When using AI tools, authors shall comply with all relevant UDSM regulations on 
intellectual property, research ethics, and confidentiality, because AI tools may transmit 
or expose sensitive, proprietary, or confidential information to third parties and thereby 
breach institutional rules and confidentiality obligations; 
9.9 Authors must be aware of the acceptable standards of using AI in different publication
 types (e.g., journal articles, books, talks, reports, reviews, research proposa ls, and
 conferences), and must check for the relevant policies and guidelines governing the
 usage. 
10. Peer review 
10.1 Reviewers shall treat manuscripts as confidential documents, and shall not upload the 
assigned unpublished manuscripts, either in whole or in part, into Generative AI tools 
and associated systems to avoid violation of authors’ confidentiality and proprietary 
rights, breach of data protection rights, or exposure of authors’ identifying information 
outside the peer review system; 
10.2 Reviewers shall not upload their peer review reports, which may contain sensitive 
information of the manuscript, or authors’ manuscripts and associated supporting files, 
into AI tools and associated systems, even if the use of such tools is restricted to 
language improvement for readability; 
10.3 Reviewers shall not use Generative AI or AI -assisted technologies to assume their 
primary responsibility of critically reviewing and critiquing the research or scientific 
content as such technologies may generate inaccurate, biased, or incomplete 
conclusions; 
10.4 Reviewers shall ensure integrity and accuracy of their peer review reports, and shall be 
responsible and accountable for the accuracy and views expressed in their reports; 
10.5 Reviewers shall be compliant with regulations on intellectual property, ethical research, 
and confidentiality since AI may disclose sensitive inf ormation to a third party, which 
may be a violation of regulations and confidentiality. 
11. Editorial and publication processes 
11.1 Editors shall treat unpublished manuscripts as confidential documents and keep 
submission details confidential; 
11.2 Editors shall not upload authors’ decision letters into Generative AI tools, even for the 
reason of language improvement, to avoid possible exposure of authors’ identifying 
information or manuscripts’ confidential information; 
11.3 Editors may use AI or AI -assisted technologies approved by the publisher for 
prescreening of the manuscripts to evaluate their originality or ethical use of AI; 
11.4 Editors shall not use AI or AI -assisted technologies for decision -making of the 
manuscripts as critical thinking and original assessment of the manuscripts falls outside 
the scope of such technologies; 
11.5 Editors shall be responsible and accountable for any editorial actions or processes, 
including final decisions communicated to the authors, related to their use of AI or AIassisted technologies;

--- Page 14 ---
11.6 Editors shall be compliant with regulations on intellectual property, ethical research, 
and confidentiality since AI may disclose sensitive information to a third party, which 
may be a violation of regulations and confidentiality; 
11.7 Editors shall ensure that authors and peer reviewers comply with these guidelines on 
the use of AI in academic publishing; 
11.8 Publishers shall ensure that editors are provided with necessary tools, such as advanced 
AI detection software, to e valuate submissions before acceptance or before such 
submissions are sent out for peer review; 
11.9 Editors shall, whenever possible and applicable, include in their reports any 
inappropriate use of AI or AI-assistive tools from the authors’ manuscripts; 
11.10 Publisher shall ensure that records of each submitted, reviewed, rejected, and published 
manuscript, including details of the responsible persons involved in any capacity, are 
securely stored while maintaining confidentiality at all stages; 
11.11 Publisher shall ensure compliance of these guidelines, and shall take necessary actions, 
as stipulated in their relevant policies and guidelines , against manuscripts flagging 
unethical use of AI before the publication process begins; 
11.12 Authors shall disclose to editors their use of AI and AI -assisted tools to facilitate 
research assessment, transparency, and reproduci bility; any AI -generated content, 
including, but not limited to, text, figures, tables, images, and codes, shall be 
accompanied by a disclosure statement in the Acknowledgement section or a relevant 
part of the manuscript, and shall align with local and global policies and guidelines. 
12. Research Funding and Compliance 
12.1 The Principal Investigator ( PI) shall be primarily responsible and accountable for the 
accuracy and integrity of information contained in the proposal or research reports 
submitted to the funder, including the University; 
12.2 The PI shall discuss with collaborators the risks of entering research information into 
AI tools. Such information may be sensitive (e.g., unpublished technical details) or 
personal (e.g., current or pending funding). The PI remains responsible for the security 
of the research information, and any person intending to input information into an AI 
tool shall first obtain approval from the information owner (e.g., the PI); 
12.3 The source of funds for AI in research shall depend on ho w the AI is being used in a 
particular study. However, where research grant proposal templates categorize software 
services as part of the budget, then it is plausible that the use of AI in the study may be 
acceptable. 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE USE IN EDUCATION AND PEDAGOGY 
Educational settings vary significantly across the University of Dar es Salaam : from large 
lecture halls to seminars ; from teaching and research labs, field, or studio avenues to clinical 
and practicum-based settings. AI has potential uses in almost all these settings. For example, 
lecturers can use AI and AI-assisted technologies to develop lecture outlines and materials, 
generate multiple versions of assignments, or compose practice problems. Students can use AI 
to research topics and study areas, iterate on text to improve written work, program, design and 
create code, art, and music, and many other uses. Depending on the use, however, AI could 
end up “doing the learning” tha t an assignment is designed to elicit, or distorting the value of 
assessments, depending on the student’s use of AI tools. 
In order to address these risks and take advantage of the opportunities that AI offers, lecturers 
have re-assessed learning outcomes in the UDSM Curriculum Review of 2025. However, it is 
still crucial that lecturers re -assess their courses in light of the advent of AI. To do so, they

--- Page 15 ---
should consider the expectations of later courses that build on the knowledge and skills their 
courses are meant to develop in students; the expectations that future workplaces will have for 
employees’ responsibility on the ethical use of AI tools; and the new opportunities for the 
purposeful use of AI tools to aid learning. 
 
Noting the potential risks of AI in education and pedagogy, any use in academic writing shall 
be declared (Appendix). The threshold for AI generated content shall not exceed 30%. This 
declaration ensures that the reported work adheres the predefined ethical guidelines for using 
AI. The goal remains to disseminate knowledge while upholding academic integrity. 
13. Academic Integrity and Accessibility 
13.1 The use of AI technologies shall be i ntegrated into teaching in ways that enhance 
learning objectives, and shall be accompanied by strategies to improve students’ 
understanding and practice of academic integrity: 
i. Instructing students on the necessity of academic integrity, and what it 
constitutes; 
ii. Guiding students toward s scholarly and applied practices consistent with 
academic integrity; 
iii. Clarifying intention of each learning outcome. 
13.2 Academic staff shall be discouraged to use AI automatic detection algorithms for 
academic integrity violations, given their unreliability and current inability to provide 
definitive evidence of violations; 
13.3 The University shall, from time to time, identify acceptable AI tools for checking 
academic integrity. 
14. Specific Uses of AI in Disciplines 
14.1 Writing Skills Courses : AI tools offer opportunities to help students develop their 
writing skills through assisting in planning, outlining, editing, and providing 
individualized feedback. However, use of AI for generating text and editing in the 
writing process raises major concerns about attribution of work, academic integrity, 
plagiarism, and failure to develop foundational and advanced writing skills an d 
judgment. Guided use of AI is encouraged as the best approach to further, rather than 
to undermine, learning outcomes. AI can be used for the following purposes: 
i. Generate an outline for a written report that students practice revising; 
ii. Summarize themes f rom a meeting transcript that students organize and 
prioritize; 
iii. Brainstorm ideas that students then evaluate; 
iv. Generate lists of sources that students validate and assess. 
14.2 Creative Courses : Creative fields , such as art and music , have long engaged in 
discussions on what is “original work” and how technology can enhance creativity. 
Practitioners, including students, are highly motivated to develop their skills, but may 
also be eager to use new technologies to create. While there ar e many opportunities, 
concerns exist around ethical attribution of sources and copyright violations. There 
should, therefore, be ethical use of AI in creative courses so as to allow students time 
to develop their own design sense/creative perspective that comply with AI ethical 
standards. Instructors should include critical discussions of the sources of data that are 
used to build these tools in their pedagogy; 
14.3 Social Sciences, Humanities, and Law Courses: In the social sciences, humanities, and 
laws, the advent of AI raises particular concerns for the written assignments,

--- Page 16 ---
individual/group assignments, presentations, lab sessions, project works, tests, quizzes, 
homeworks, papers, and exams that are a core component of student work in many 
courses. Passive reliance on AI by students to generate literature reviews or written 
work risks undermining the learning objectives of assignments, producing poor quality 
work, and violating academic integrity and standards. Instructors are encouraged to 
explore ways to responsibly incorporate AI into social science , humanities, and law 
courses in ways that enhance student learning. This can include having students 
evaluate AI output and explore ways to test its validity; 
14.4 Mathematics, Physical Sciences, Computer Science, and Engineering: Technical and 
mathematical courses have adjusted well in the past to incorporate new technologies, 
such as computing and visualization tools. AI may provide similar opportunities to 
enhance education in the space of mathematics, computer science, physical sciences, 
and engineering. Some of the biggest concerns with current systems is their inaccuracy 
and circular reasoning. Instructors should make themselves aware of the capabilities of 
current systems and the fast-changing behavior of these systems on mathematical , 
scientific, and engineering problems. Students should be educated on the capabilities 
and limitations of these systems, prohibiting their use where basic skills need to be 
developed, and encouraging their use in cases that can improve student learning. 
15. Course Content Creation 
15.1 Academic staff should be explicit in identifying expectations regarding the use of AI 
tools in their courses, including individual assignments; 
15.2 Academic staff are encouraged to identify well -defined learning outcomes to provide 
rationale on how and when AI can/cannot be used in their courses; 
15.3 When AI is permitted, academic staff should be clear about student expectations in 
terms of documentation and attribution, what work is expected to be produced by the 
student themselves, and how the student is expected to validate or verify the output 
from AI; 
15.4 Academic staff are encouraged to engage in ongoing conversations about the 
importance of academic int egrity, including the fact that basic academic integrity 
principles remain important and still apply regardless of the existence of AI tools; 
15.5 Integrating critique of current practices and uses of AI, including ethical issues, into all 
stages of teaching and learning is vital; 
15.6 While academic staff may use AI as a tool for developing teaching materials, they are 
particularly encouraged to adhere to the same standards of attribution that they require 
of their students. 
16. Course Assessment and Examination 
16.1 Students should ensure ethical use of AI in open-book assignments (e.g., 
individual/group assignment, presentations, lab work, project work, and quiz); 
16.2 The use of AI in closed-book assignments and examinations is prohibited; 
16.3 The use of AI to generate report s or presentation materials from Practical 
Training/Teaching Practice and students’ projects, including final -year projects, is 
prohibited; 
16.4 Course instructors should ensure ethical use of AI in assessing students’ works, 
including reports from lab works and reports from Practical Training/Teaching Practice.

--- Page 17 ---
17. Dissertations/Theses and Academic Papers 
17.1 Any use of AI in the conception, production, analysis and/or writing of a 
dissertation/thesis should be carefully documented and disclosed to the Office of 
Director of Postgraduate Studies; 
17.2 The use of AI in the conception, production, analysis and/or writing of journal paper, 
book, review report, reports, proposal and any related forms of academic writing should 
be carefully documented and disclosed to the Office of Director of Research and 
Publication; 
17.3 Academic supervisors should ensure ethical use of AI in reviewing and assessing 
students’ dissertations/theses and manuscripts. 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE USE IN ADMINISTRATION 
AI use in administration is a strategic opportunity to elevate standards, reconsider policies and 
procedures, and meet the evolving needs of UDSM stakeholders. These guidelines have delved 
into the risks, use cases and benefits of AI within and between the university’s administrative 
services, aiming at identifying means to support UDSM mission and vision effectively and 
efficiently. These guidelines on AI administrative use are informed by key principles that 
include ethical and safe use, data quality and control, human oversight, privacy and 
confidentiality, and alignment with audiences. The guidelines demonstrate key areas of AI 
administrative use and how the processes shall be guided i.e., risk of AI -enhanced cyber and 
related attacks, compliance oversig ht and accountability, service, information quality and 
accuracy, legal issues in AI use, and staff training and professional development. 
18. AI Management 
18.1 The deployment of AI within UDSM shall comply with national laws, regulations, 
guidelines and policies; 
18.2 The University shall focus on the effects of AI on academic and administrative staff, 
students, and communities in learning , and should strive to help improve the services 
of all UDSM community members through responsible and effective use of AI in 
academics and administrative works; 
18.3 The University shall take proactive measures to prevent risks and negative impacts of 
AI on intended users and the institution; 
18.4 A privacy impact assessment shall be carried out where AI systems use or analyze 
personal data, including sensitive and private information of staff and students of the 
University. Staff and students are encouraged to protect personal data through focused 
data collection and respecting user permissions; 
18.5 Administrative staff shall ensure that relevant data is used and collected through legal 
and ethical means, and that the data provenance is documented and managed; 
18.6 DICT shall ensure that all ICT systems of the University undergo regular testing and 
risk mitigation to demonstrate their safety and effectiveness for intended use , and that 
information and data of the University are not retrieved by AI systems or found in public 
domains; 
18.7 The UDSM Quality Assur ance Bureau shall any integration of AI into research, 
teaching and learning, consultancy, or administration is monitored, evaluated, and 
reported; 
18.8 The UDSM Center for Continuing Education shall ensure regular capacity building 
programmes on AI across all Units of the University;

--- Page 18 ---
18.9 The University shall ensure that there is meaningful human oversight and clear lines of 
authority over AI system deployment, use, and impacts , and shall ensure that AI 
governance processes are documented, maintained, rev iewed, and updated to ensure 
accountability; 
18.10 The University shall ensure that there are additional safeguards and that contingency 
processes are in place to handle failures or incidents with high-risk systems; 
18.11 The university shall ensure that systems are d eployed in consultation with diverse 
stakeholders to identify risks , and that clear and adequate information should be 
provided to users regarding AI system capabilities and limitations. 
19. Risks of AI-Enhanced Cyber and Related Attacks 
19.1 The University shall remain vigilant, implementing good contract oversight and robust 
security measures and fostering a culture of cybersecurity awareness to safeguard 
against any evolving risks associated with external AI utilization; 
19.2 The University shall ensure that training and awareness campaigns for staff as well as 
students remain a critical component of mitigating external threat risks. 
20. Compliance Oversight and Accountability 
20.1 The University shall ensure that Colleges, Schools, Institutes, major departments and 
Directorates across the institution are tasked with compliance, privacy, policy, and 
governance to address reputational, financial, regulatory, and compliance needs in the 
AI space. 
21. Service, Information Quality and Accuracy 
21.1 The University shall ensure that appropriate staffing and training, with a focus on 
auditing and evaluating the training data and output of the AI tools, are provided to staff 
and students; 
21.2 DICT shall ensure a mandatory, documented testing, and quality assurance plan per AI 
solution is recommended as part of IT governance. A mechanism for users to report 
concerns and allow for analysis by units running the tools is critical; 
21.3 Users shall be advised that , despite compelling and authoritative presentations, AI 
outputs must be validated. 
22. Legal Issues in AI Use 
22.1 Staff and students shall be warned that hasty or disordered deployment of AI for 
administrative purposes could lead to consequences , such as bias in decision -making, 
plagiarism, and violation of privacy laws. 
23. Staff Training and Professional Development 
23.1 The University shall ensure that staff have the appropriate training and skills to 
effectively use AI tools within administrative contexts; 
23.2 The University leadership and management shall enforce human oversight and 
expertise to guide and optimize AI-driven processes. 
24. Amendment and Revision of the Guidelines 
24.1 The Office of DVC-Research shall monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of these 
guidelines; 
24.2 These guidelines shall be reviewed after every three years from its approval; 
24.3 Where implementation challenges have been identified, the University shall revise the 
clauses accordingly and make necessary amendments.

--- Page 19 ---
25. Financial Implications 
Implementing these guidelines has financial implications. Therefore, units shall allocate a 
dedicated budget to ensure effective implementation. The budget items include the following: 
o Professional training to the staff members under relevant units on the ethical use of AI 
in research, teaching, consultancy, administration; 
o AI tools (software) for editors , researchers, educators, and administrators ; these AI 
tools may be procured, obtained through subscription, or developed internally by the 
UDSM Units; 
o Publication and distribution of the guidelines across departments and sections under 
UDSM Units.

--- Page 20 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Carayannis, E. G. and Grigoroudis, E. Introduction to the Handbook of Research on Artificial Intelligence, 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship. The Edward Elgar, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.4337/9781839106750.00006. 
 
Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Act of Tanzania (1999), http://parliament.go.tz/. 
 
Cornell University (2023) Generative AI in Academic Research: Perspectives and Cultural Norms, 
https://it.cornell.edu/sites/default/files/itc-drupal10files/Generative%20AI%20in%20Research_%20Cornell%20Task%20Force%20ReportDec2023.pdf 
 
Cornell University (2023) Generative Artificial Intelligence for Education and Pedagogy, 
https://teaching.cornell.edu/sites/default/files/2023-08/Cornell-GenerativeAIForEducationReport_2.pdf 
 
Cornell University (2024) Genera tive AI in Administration, https://it.cornell.edu/sites/default/files/itcdrupal10files/Cornell%20Generative%20AI%20in%20Administration%20Task%20Force%20ReportJan2024_1.pdf 
 
Flanagin A, Pirracchio R, Khera R, Berkwits M, Hswen Y, Bibbins-Domingo K. Reporting Use of AI in 
Research and Scholarly Publication—JAMA Network Guidance. JAMA. 2024;331(13):1096–1098. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2024.3471 
 
Hou, Stephen M., International Patent Office Guidance on Artificial Intelligence Inventions (May 15, 2024). 
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4843648 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4843648 
 
Lin, Z. Beyond principlism: practical strategies for ethical AI use in research practices. AI Ethics (2024). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-024-00585-5 
 
National Guidelines for Artificial Intelligence in Education (2024). Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology. 
 
National Digital Education Guidelines for Universities (2025). Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology. 
 
National Digital Education Strategy (2024/25 – 2029/30). Ministry of Education, Science and Technology. 
 
Saba, D., Sahli, Y., Maouedj, R., Hadi di, A., Medjahed, M.B. (2021). Towards Artificial Intelligence: 
Concepts, Applications, and Innovations. In: Hassanien, AE., Taha, M.H.N., Khalifa, N.E.M. (eds) 
Enabling AI Applications in Data Science. Studies in Computational Intelligence, vol 911. Springer, 
Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52067-0_6 
 
The Africa Declaration on Artificial Intelligence (2025), Global AI Summit on Africa . 
https://aiexpoafrica.com/africa-declaration-on-artificial-intelligence/ 
 
UDSM Consultancy Policy and Operational Procedures (1994, Revised 2024) 
 
UDSM Guidelines for Commercialization of Intellectual Property, Innovation and Research Products (2022) 
 
UDSM Journal Policy & Guidelines (2024). 
 
UDSM Policy on Intellectual Property (2008, Revised 2022).

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX 
 
DECLARATION FOR USE OF AI IN SCIENTIFIC WRITING 
(Note: AI threshold should be less than 30%) 
 
1. Primary Contact Details 
Name 
Title 
College/School/Institute 
Department (If Applicable) 
Email 
 
2. Declaration of Use of Artificial Intelligence in (Tick appropriate): 
 Research project proposal Dissertation 
 Grant funding proposal Book chapter 
 Journal Article Report 
 No use of Artificial Intelligence Other: ……………………………………… 
 
3. List of AI tools/systems used (indicate links, model/tool name, and manufacturer) 
 
4. Specific use of the AI tools/systems in your work 
 
 
5. Systematic steps on how the AI tool was used 
 
 
6. How have you used and/changed the generated AI output? 
 
 
7. What is the proportion (%) of AI content? 
 
 
 
 
 
Date: …………………………………… Signature: ……………………….